# Introduction to TREA
Transcriptional Regulator Enrichment Analysis

Gene expression is controlled by transcriptional regulators (TRs) including DNA-binding transcription factors and their cofactors, as well as modifiers of chromatin structure and epigenetic tags, which all interact effectuate changes, in response to extra- and intracellular signals. TRs represent drug targets with the potential to simultaneously modulate multiple DEGs. To identify TRs of experimentally-derived differential gene expression datasets, we developed a conservative, multi-step methodology that draws on both computationally- and biologically-derived regulator-target gene interaction data from multiple resource databases: i) transcription factor regulation inferred from integrating genome-wide ChIP-X experiments (Chea), ii) JASPAR transcription factor DNA-binding preference position weight matrices, iii) TRANSFAC transcription factor DNA-binding preferences position weight matrices, and iv) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis Upstream Regulator analytic (IPA®, Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Together, these resource databases allow for interrogation of gene expression datasets for enrichment of downstream targets of ~1350 TRs. 

Basic operation of TREA: Universal gene ID formatted gene expression datasets are evaluated independently by each database analytic. Chea and JASPAR-TRANSFAC databases are accessed through the online open-access Enrichr platform (https://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr3/). Resource database output files containing statistically enriched TRs (Enrichr adj. P < 0.05; IPA Upstream Regulator P < 0.01) and their downstream target gene IDs were processed for TREA using the scripts provided in this repository. Final TREA libraries containing significantly enriched TRs and associated astrocyte target genes were then generated for each condition through a screening for candidates that met one or more of the following criteria: i) TR is identified by IPA® and Chea or JASPAR-TRANSFAC; ii) TR is identified by IPA® or Chea or JASPAR-TRANSFAC and exhibits a significant fold-change (up or down) in the respective gene expression profile. When the same TR was identified across two or more resource databases, target gene ID lists were merged into a single TR-target gene signature.
